Crelanu: Elves, you have fought valiantly and have won a great victory at the forest of Wesmere. Yet the forces ranged against you are not yet defeated. Indeed, they grow stronger every day. You contend against destiny. But for the moment you have diverted the orcs' attention.

Kalenz: What do you mean, 'diverted their attention'?

Crelanu: You cannot even imagine it. Why do you suppose orcs came all the way here to attack you?

Landar: Because they are orcs! Look old man, can you help us beat them or not?

Crelanu: You must be Landar. Very brave, but also very brash.

Kalenz: Landar is brash, but he does speak plainly why we came here. I do not understand what you are talking about, either. Olurf tells me you are very wise, but only help for a price. We will pay any price within our power; just name it.

Cleodil: Are you saying the orcs attacked us looking for something?

Crelanu: Yes, that is what I am saying.

Cleodil: It makes sense now. The Saurians were asking about a dastone, and also after we won in Wesmere there was an Orc mumbling something about a dastone...

Crelanu: It's not a dastone, it's the stone: They mean the Ruby of Fire...

Kalenz: What's that, and what does it have to do with us?

Crelanu: It's the source of your troubles. It is a very powerful magical artifact. The tyrant Haldric has it, but he has fooled the orcs into believing that the elves are hiding it. But now, they suspect they have been fooled. Haldric and his people will pay for his arrogance.

Kalenz: Hmm... You seem to love king Haldric even less than the elf-lords of the Ka'lian do...How do you know all this of him?

Crelanu: I once counted Haldric a friend, but he was the one who banished me from Wesnoth. He charged me with trying to steal the Ruby, seeking its power for myself...but the truth is that the Ruby is warping Haldric's mind, making him ever more surly and suspicious of those he once counted allies. Anyone can wield the Ruby in battle when his anger merges with the fiery nature of the gem, but only a true master of magic, or one who is uncommonly pure in heart, can safely handle it outside of battle. Unshielded, its magical radiance changes Haldric a little every time he comes close to it.

Kalenz: So the orcs will, seeking the Ruby, now attack the humans?

Crelanu: Yes. But after they win, your people will be next. And after you, the dwarves.

Landar: Don't worry overmuch about us. It is clear you have troubles of your own.

Kalenz: We are grateful for this counsel. But can you help us directly? Is there a way to stop the orcs?

Crelanu: You cannot defeat them with the forces you can now muster. You can only gain time, in the hope that you can use it to grow strong again.

Kalenz: How? Don't tell me we had to fight the saurians, cross Arkan-Thoria, contend against the river monsters, and fight trolls and yetis to come here for nothing!

Crelanu: You need to kill their Great Chief and make it look like he was murdered by orcs. That way the orcs will start a civil war for succession, for many yearn to take their Great Chief's place. You will be safe until a new leader arises strong enough to unite them again.

Olurf: Kill an orcish Great Chieftain? But he's guarded better than a Troll hole!

Crelanu: Indeed, it will not be at all easy. But maybe I can help you...

Kalenz: But you want something in return...

Crelanu: It is as you say. These drakes were after my book. This book has all the magic and spells I know in it. They are very powerful, but the one enemy they cannot defeat is old age. The knowledge tempts me to prolong my life by evil and dark means... But this is the work of my life and I can no more destroy it than I could slay my own child. Aquagar is slain, but more will come. One of my allies has betrayed me, and now too many know of this book.

Kalenz: If you come with us, we will protect you...

Crelanu: No, my time is done... But the charge I lay on you, Kalenz, is to take my book and keep it from unworthy hands. Find someone to hold it who will not be corrupted by its power. And then find someone worthy not merely to hold it, but to use it!

Landar: If your book is as powerful as you say, why not use it against the orcs?

Crelanu: Because the book is like the Ruby of Fire. Any fool can use the magic in the book, but only a master can vanquish the lust for power that it will bring out in him. He who fails will turn into something like Haldric, or worse...

Kalenz: Cleodil is pure in heart. Perhaps she can guard your book without being corrupted by its secrets...

Cleodil: I am sure all these secrets are far beyond my art. My art is the healing kind and I...

Crelanu: There is no other option.

Kalenz: Very well, suppose Cleodil accepts the guardianship of your book. How will you then help us slay the orcish Great Chief?

Crelanu: There is a way, but it will be very dangerous. Two of you must enter the orcish camp by stealth and kill the Great Chief. There is a potion that will make you invisible for some time.

Kalenz: The elves have legends of such things. I suppose you have this potion, then?

Crelanu: Indeed I do, but it is perilous to use. It is made from the eyes of a powerful undead lich. It will make you invisible, but it is likely also to have undesirable effects, some temporary, some permanent!

Cleodil: No! This is too dark and dangerous! I fear for you, Kalenz! I...would not see you come to harm.

Kalenz: What undesirable effects?

Crelanu: Your physical strength will decrease, though in return you will be able to use magic more easily and powerfully. Cleodil will show you. But the real danger will be the touch of the lich's evil nature stealing through your veins. You will need to fight and master this evil in yourself, else you might slowly turn into a lesser demilich yourself. This is why you must take only a small dose and finish the job quickly. Delay and you will fail in your mission; take too large a dose, and you will become as the lich was.

Kalenz: It is a dark and desperate course you set before me, but I see no other way; we must stop the orcs. As leader I cannot ask my men to run a risk I will not take myself, so I will be one of the two who will go to kill the Great Chief. But I will not compel anyone else to come with me, not at peril of being overwhelmed from within by evil magic. Does anyone volunteer?

Landar: I will come with you. We shall not fail!

Crelanu: This does not seem the wisest of choices.

Kalenz: Landar may be impetuous, but he is a great fighter and my trusted friend. We should be about our task now, I think. Crelanu, your book will be safe with us. Cleodil will guard it until we find a worthy keeper.

Crelanu: Come, I will give you and Landar the potion and show you a safe point to cross the river.

With the battle of Tath over, Kalenz and Landar knew the time had come to carry out Crelanu's dangerous but necessary plan. Meanwhile Cleodil had, reluctantly, been training Kalenz in a selected few of the secrets of Crelanu's book ...

Cleodil: I have taught you all that I dare. My lord...Kalenz...I pray you come back safely. My heart aches when I think of you going into such danger as this. It is peril not merely to your body, but to the essence of yourself.

Kalenz: Cleodil...

Cleodil: I do not think I could bear your death. Still less could I bear the corruption of your soul; the grief would ruin me.

Kalenz: My eyes are open. To the danger, and...to you. You glow like a star in the night, Cleodil. You will be my guide out of darkness.

Kalenz: Here we are at last. Landar, are you sure you want to go through with this?

Landar: Absolutely. Let's do it!

Kalenz: We need to kill the Great Chief and get out before the effect of the philter end\s. Time to drink it down now!

Kalenz: This feels passing strange! Landar, remember to stay far from the wolves-they may be able to smell us.

Kalenz: The orcish chieftain is dead! Now we must make appear he was slain by an orcish hand!

Ozul: The Great Chief has been murdered! Whoever did it will only get da throne over my dead stinking body!

Tamitahan: I am the strongest warlord! I will be Chief!

Gvur: No way anyone will steal my throne!

Khrubar: This is my time and I will kill anyone who disputes it!

Kalenz: The plan is working! Now we will take back what's ours!

Cleodil: Kalenz, your mission is complete. The orcish Great Chieftain is dead and you have recaptured your home. Yet I sense there is turmoil in your mind...

Kalenz: It is indeed as you say, Cleodil. It is that potion that gnaws at me. I cannot enjoy our victories, nor can I rest. I am fighting it every single moment.

Cleodil: Crelanu warned us this might occur...

Kalenz: There was no other choice. Even if we die, it was worth it.

Cleodil: You will not die. You must fight it. I have faith in you Kalenz...beloved...you will overcome and master it. It will be hard and painful, but you will beat the potion. It is Landar that truly concerns me...

Kalenz: He seems to handle it better than do I...

Cleodil: It does seem so, Kalenz. But I fear things may not be as they seem. Landar's mind has become dark and clouded to my healing senses.

Kalenz: I understand too well what that may portend, beloved, but I do not wish to believe it. Landar is my friend, near as dear to me as you are.

Cleodil: Some dwarves have been found dead in our camp. Landar is extremely unfriendly towards them, and ill-feeling is growing. I think the dwarves will leave us soon.

Kalenz: I will try to mend matters between them...

Cleodil: I see I cannot convince you. Go, do as you must; but be careful Kalenz, for I fear for us all...

But Kalenz failed to persuade the dwarves. The dwarves left, and Landar insisted the elves must march on the empire of the Saurians...

Cleodil: Kalenz...the shydes and druids are not happy with this. The saurians are already beaten, and there is too much hate in Landar's heart. Something is not right here.

Kalenz: I am not entirely easy with this myself, Cleodil. But there is something to what Landar says; the wide green world must know there is a price, a heavy price for raiding in the forest of Wesmere.

Cleodil: Then you who walk the earth path and carry steel can collect that price. Those on the faerie path will not be with you. Not this time.

Kalenz: We do as we must.

Kalenz: That was the last. A bitter day's work, and no memory to be proud of.

Landar WHISPER: A shame we missed the opportunity to rid the forests of dwarves, as well.

Landar: We have finally reached Saurgrath, their capitol. Remember whose side they have taken in the war against us.

Landar: Now is our chance to finish them off...

Kalenz: I fear this will be a bloodbath...

Landar: Destroy them, root and branch. Burn out their homes. Let none remain alive!

Landar?: These are but eggs and hatchlings.

Landar: Do not spare them. They will only foul our forests anew when they get their growth.

Anduilas: But...to kill their young? Are we to go that far?

Kalenz: Stay. You need not have the blood of children on your hands, and I shall not.

Landar: Perhaps you are too tender-minded to do what must be done, but many of us are not.

Kalenz: I will not set elf against elf. But, Landar, I fear you are storing up a dreadful price for yourself.

Landar: Stand aside. I will do what is needful.

saurian: Their revenge is terrible! I fear for our kind.

saurian: Don't flee. We cannot abandon our capitol.

It is said that the battle with the North Elves was the beginning of the end for Landar's revolt. But civil war smoldered on for many more years, neither side mustering enough strength to achieve a decisive victory. Until, eventually, Landar's increasingly harsh and arrogant ways drove away many of his followers. After assembling all the troops he could, Kalenz marched against his old friend and now mortal enemy, Landar, in the forest of Gitamoth...: 

Kalenz: Landar, let us spill no more elvish blood. Give up. We can help you!

Landar: No! It all ends here!

Landar: I fall. Perhaps now I can rest!

Kalenz: I am deeply grieved that it came to this, Landar. You were my best friend. I was blind to what the potion was doing to you. I was fighting it myself!

Landar: I know. But you are not at fault, for I did not take just one bottle. I wanted to make sure we could kill the orcish Great Chief, so I went back for a second and drank that one, too. Now I have driven our dwarvish allies away and brought death and disaster to our own people. I have even tried to kill my own friend. I am a disgrace to elven-kind.

Kalenz: It was not all your fault. May be the curse of Aquagar struck true, or may be yours was the blood-price fate required of us for victory. Rest well, my friend. Rest well Landar, Hero of the Elves!

Kalenz buried Landar with full honors and made him a monument worthy of a true elvish hero.

Landar's remaining followers' lives were spared, but they were banished to Gitamoth forest, henceforth known as Silent Forest.

As Landar had wiped out the Elvish Council, Kalenz was unanimously chosen as High Lord of the Elves. North and South Elves swore allegiance to him.

Kalenz reorganized the Elves so they could mobilize for war more readily. He knew that the orcish threat was not over; that the elves, through hesitation, had lost a golden opportunity to end the threat and that trouble would someday return.

When Kalenz felt his work to have been done as well as it might be, he retired with Cleodil to their home in the Forest of Lintanir.

Cleodil bore Kalenz children who were tall, and beautiful, and inherited in full measure both their mother's healing gifts and their father's talented and searching mind. In the fullness of time, after a long life full of accomplishment and love and laughter, Cleodil died after the manner of Elves, aging swiftly to a peaceful end.

But Kalenz's story was not yet over. Aquagar's curse was fulfilled; prolonged in life by Crelanu's philter, he outlived not only his beloved but their children. Sundered from his kin by their mortality, fleeing the reflections in their eyes of his lost beloved, he left his home and wandered for many a year across the Great Continent. Oft did he arrive unexpected at times and places when his people were in dire straits, and succor them with wisdom or magic or his bright keen blade.

To learn of Kalenz's last and perhaps greatest deeds, and those in which he was most alone, seek ye the tale of Delfador the Great and the fall of the usurping Queen Asheviere.

